Blog Post (#213)
leaningtech/labs: content/blog/CJ-3-1-roadmap.mdx

import { DISCORD_URL } from "@/consts.ts";

In this post, we’ll provide an overview of CheerpJ, the capabilities of the current release, and our ambitious plans for the future of Java and OpenJDK on the browser.

<div class="flex items-center gap-2 flex-wrap">
  <LinkButton
    type="primary"
    href="/cheerpj3/getting-started"
    label="Get started"
    iconRight="mi:arrow-right"
  />

  <LinkButton
    type="discord"
    href={DISCORD_URL}
    iconLeft="fa-brands:discord"
    label="Join the Discord server"
  />
</div>

CheerpJ 3.1 is the latest stable release of the new CheerpJ architecture introduced as part of CheerpJ 3.0, first announced in [May 9th, 2023](/blog/announcing-cheerpj-3) and released in [February 1st, 2024](/blog/cheerpj-3.0).

The new architecture, built around a pure-JIT JVM in WebAssembly, has been an outstanding success, delivering on its promise of making CheerpJ faster, simpler to use and compatible with the vast majority of Java applications and applets. Virtually all users of CheerpJ core, as well as of our browser extensions, have seamlessly transitioned to the new architecture in the span of the last six months.

> In CheerpJ 3.0, some features were still lacking compared to the legacy CheerpJ 2.3 release, with audio support being the most prominent. Moreover, notwithstanding our intense testing, several bugs were found by users over the last few months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In CheerpJ 3.0, some features were still lacking compared to the legacy CheerpJ 2.3 release, with audio support being the most prominent. Moreover, notwithstanding our intense testing, several bugs and regressions were found by users.
```

> CheerpJ 3.1 is a stability-focused release that restores support for all the features lost in the transition to the new architecture and fixes all the bugs we have found after exposing CheerpJ to real-world workloads from our users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpJ 3.1 is a stability-focused release that restores support for all the features lost in the transition to the new architecture and fixes all the bugs we have found after exposing CheerpJ to large real-world workloads.
```

- **Supports _very large_ applications**, our stress test is IntelliJ IDEA 2019 which ships ~400MBs of JARs. [Check it out](https://x.com/alexpignotti/status/1729915428258926713).
- **Supports graphical applications**, both AWT- and Swing-based ones are supported, including third-party Look&Feels. Multiple applications, each with multiple windows, can run at the same time.
- **Full support for reflection and classloaders**, including custom ones designed to support plugins or encrypted JARs.
- **Powerful interoperability with JavaScript**
  - [Library mode](https://cheerpj.com/docs/guides/library-mode): A new solution to integrate Java libraries into Web applications using a clean `async/await` interface
  - [JavaScript natives](https://cheerpj.com/docs/guides/implementing-native-methods), making it possible to implement Java `native` methods (JNI) directly in JavaScript with a convenient interface. This feature can also be used to interact with JavaScript and DOM APIs from Java.

In short, thanks to CheerpJ most Java applications and libraries can be run in the browser without any additional work or changes to the code.

> CheerpJ 3.1 is the last release of CheerpJ to focus exclusively on Java 8 support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpJ 3.1 is the last release of CheerpJ to focus exclusively on Java 8 support. Support for modern versions of Java is already underway, and we are targeting support for Java 11 as part of the upcoming CheerpJ 4.0 release, with Java 17 following later in the year.
```

> Support for modern versions of Java is already underway, and we are targeting support for Java 11 as part of the upcoming CheerpJ 4.0 release, with Java 17 following later in the year. In the long term, we aim to reach parity with the most recent Java LTS version, while preserving support for Java 8 and all intermediate LTS versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the long term, we aim to reach parity with the most recent Java LTS version, while preserving support for Java 8 and all intermediate LTS versions.
```

### How does CheerpJ work?

![CheerpJ architecture](./cheerpj-3-deep-dive-arch.png)

CheerpJ is a Java Virtual Machine in WebAssembly for the browser, which JIT-compiles Java bytecode into JavaScript.
It is a sophisticated tool with many moving parts, the main ones being:

- A WebAssembly **JVM and Just-In-Time compiler for** Java bytecode. The code contained in class files is dynamically compiled and optimized. The JIT compiler supports advanced optimizations such as inlining and dynamic devirtualization.
- A complete and unmodified build of **OpenJDK**.
- **A virtualized system layer, including:**
  - [Virtualized file systems](https://cheerpj.com/docs/guides/File-System-support), providing access to assets over HTTP, local persistent R/W storage via IndexedDB and interaction with JavaScript data.
  - [Virtualized networking](https://cheerpj.com/docs/guides/Networking) support via Tailscale. Both server and client applications are supported.
  - Seamless clipboard integration using the [Clipboard API](https://cheerpj.com/docs/reference/cheerpjInit#clipboardmode).
  - A window manager, to support multiple Java windows and multiple Java applications in the same Web page.

> For more details about the design of CheerpJ, please refer to [the deep dive](/blog/cheerpj-3-deep-dive) we published at the time of the initial CheerpJ 3.0 release. You can also read the [architecture page](https://cheerpj.com/docs/explanation/architecture) in the CheerpJ documentation.

Reviewer: Links should open in a new window to avoid breaking the reading flow

While all this sounds exciting, it’s not the end of the story. CheerpJ 4.0 and future releases will not only introduce support for modern Java, but also new functionality that will allow applications that are not written in pure Java to also run on the browser.

### What about Java apps with JNI components?

CheerpJ 3.1 can effectively run any Java application in the browser, but the reality is that many Java applications are not _actually_ 100% Java.

It’s fairly common to find Java applications that make extensive use of JNI code to access libraries or system capabilities that are not available to Java otherwise. This has historically been a considerable real-world limitation of CheerpJ, and up to CheerpJ 3.1 we could only offer the use of [JavaScript natives](https://cheerpj.com/docs/guides/implementing-native-libraries) as a workaround.

CheerpJ 4.0 will introduce support for WebAssembly JNI modules, providing a complete solution for all cases where the C/C++ JNI code is available.

To understand the promise and scope of this new feature, let’s consider a popular use case of CheerpJ: running Minecraft on the browser.

<video controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>

> 	<source src="./minecraft_video.mp4" type="video/mp4" />

Reviewer: Review the cropping, there are 2 or 3 white pixels on the right side that are very distracting

Reviewer: @GabrielaReyna Can we recrop the video to remove the extra white pixels on the right side?

</video>

To keep things simple let’s focus on the Minecraft 1.0 release. It was composed of `client.jar` containing all the game logic, and LWJGL: a Java library to access OpenGL rendering. All the logic in `client.jar` works correctly in CheerpJ, already in the 3.0 [release](https://browsercraft.cheerpj.com/).

LWJGL, on the other hand, it’s only superficially Java. Most of its value comes from JNI methods which provide direct access to each and every method exposed by OpenGL. These methods are written in C and automatically generated by the LWJGL build system from a declarative representation of the OpenGL API.

> As of the 3.0 release we could get Minecraft to partially work by manually implementing a small subset of the LWJGL [JNI methods](https://cheerpj.com/docs/guides/implementing-native-methods) directly in JavaScript, but this method turned out to be extremely time consuming. Moreover, Minecraft is built on legacy OpenGL techniques which do not directly map to WebGL capabilities. The end result was promising but underwhelming, with lots of manual effort required to achieve a poorly rendered and slow version of the game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of the 3.0 release we could get Minecraft to partially work by manually implementing a small subset of the LWJGL [JNI methods](https://github.com/leaningtech/cheerpj-natives) directly in JavaScript, but this method turned out to be extremely time consuming. Moreover, Minecraft is built on legacy OpenGL techniques which do not directly map to WebGL capabilities. The end result was promising but underwhelming, with lots of manual effort required to achieve a poorly rendered and slow version of the game.
```

> The solution to all these problems is to simply compile more things to Wasm. CheerpJ 4.0 will support loading of WebAssembly modules at runtime. These modules can be generated from C/C++ code coming from either JNI modules or arbitrary libraries required by Java applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The solution to all these problems is to simply compile even more things to Wasm. CheerpJ 4.0 will support loading of WebAssembly modules at runtime. These modules can be generated from C/C++ code coming from either JNI modules or arbitrary libraries required by Java applications.
```

> In the case of Minecraft there are several moving parts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of Minecraft there are several components:
```

- **lwjgl2.wasm**: Is generated from the unmodified C code generated by the LWJGL build system. It exposes all the native methods of LWJGL, completely removing the need to manually write any code in JavaScript.

> - **gl4es.wasm**: Is a WebAssembly build of gl4es [LINK], a FOSS library that implements legacy GL on top of GLES

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **gl4es.wasm**: Is a WebAssembly build of [gl4es](https://github.com/ptitSeb/gl4es/), a FOSS library that implements legacy GL on top of GLES.
```

> - **gles.wasm**: A WebAssembly module mapping GLES APIs to WebGL, which will be automatically provided by CheerpJ

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **gles.wasm**: A WebAssembly module mapping GLES APIs to WebGL, which will be automatically provided by CheerpJ.
```

> - **X11.wasm**: A background process providing X11 emulation to integrate native Java windows and windows created for OpenGL rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **X11.wasm**: A background process providing X11 emulation to integrate Java windows and windows created for OpenGL rendering.
```

The end result of this stack is Minecraft rendering correctly in the browser via CheerpJ, with the level of performance being already quite good and with more improvements planned before CheerpJ 4.0 is released.

> All these WebAssembly modules can be generated without any change to the original code using Cheerp, our C/C++ to WebAssembly/JavaScript compiler. This is possible thanks to new Cheerp features that will soon support compiling any unmodified Linux C/C++ applications to WebAssembly. Stay tuned for more information and join our [Discord server](https://discord.leaningtech.com/) to be always updated on all our products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these WebAssembly modules can be generated without any change to the original code using Cheerp, our C/C++ to WebAssembly/JavaScript compiler. This is possible thanks to new [Cheerp](https://cheerp.io) features that will soon support compiling any unmodified Linux C/C++ applications to WebAssembly. Stay tuned for more information and join our [Discord server](https://discord.leaningtech.com/) to be always updated on all our products.
```

### All of this, only for Minecraft?

As it often happens with our [development tools](https://labs.leaningtech.com/), solutions might be inspired by a specific use case, but are always designed to be generic.

Popular toolkits such as SWT and JavaFX, that are also not currently supported by CheerpJ, have very similar characteristics to the Minecraft/LWJGL use case:

> - **Shallow Java surface** with lots of C/C++ JNI logic;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Shallow Java surface** with lots of C/C++ JNI logic
```

> - **Dependency on large C libraries**, GTK in particular;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Dependency on large C libraries**, GTK in particular
```

> - **X11 requirement**, particularly for SWT;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **X11 requirement**, particularly for SWT
```

> - **OpenGL requirement**, particularly for JavaFX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **OpenGL requirement**, particularly for JavaFX
```

> It is quite clear that the building blocks to successfully run Minecraft in CheerpJ are the same required to achieve SWT and JavaFX support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is clear that the building blocks to successfully run Minecraft in CheerpJ are the same required to achieve SWT and JavaFX support.
```

> The timeline for supporting these toolkits is not yet finalised, and they might be included only after the CheerpJ 4.0 release, but the good news is that they can all be supported within the existing CheerpJ architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The timeline for supporting these toolkits is not yet finalised, and they might be included only after the CheerpJ 4.0 release, but they can all be supported within the existing CheerpJ architecture.
```

In addition, CheerpJ is not limited to targeting existing Java applications. Thanks to [library mode](https://cheerpj.com/docs/guides/library-mode), it is possible to use Java libraries directly from JavaScript with natural async/await syntax, and embed them in Web applications.

We believe that CheerpJ and WebAssembly will enable Java to become a first-class programming language for the Web, opening the door to a new generation of Web native Java-powered client applications. We hope you find these possibilities as exciting as we do.

## Get started

### 1. Add the loader

```html
<script src="https://cjrtnc.leaningtech.com/3.1/cj3loader.js"></script>
```

### 2. Initialize the virtual machine

```js
await cheerpjInit();
```

CheerpJ is [extensively documented](/cheerpj3), ranging from basic tutorials to the detailed API reference.

<LinkButton
	type="primary"
	href="/cheerpj3/getting-started"
	label="Get started"
	iconRight="mi:arrow-right"
/>

## Community

For questions, discussion, and support, [join our Discord](https://discord.leaningtech.com). It’s an active community where both Leaning Technologies developers and experienced users can provide help.

---

> CheerpJ is a product built with passion and a lot of coffee by Leaning Technologies, an international team of WebAssembly hackers based in Amsterdam (NL) and Leeds (UK). We hope you’ll find it as exciting as we do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpJ is a product built with passion and a lot of coffee by Leaning Technologies, an international team of WebAssembly hackers based in Amsterdam (NL) and Leeds (UK). We hope you’ll love it as much as we do.
```
